---
title: "Extreme event of water exchange between the Western Boundary Currents and the adjacent shelf in the South Atlantic"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2023-05-22-WBC
venue: "International Workshop on Western Boundary Current – Subtropical Continental Shelf Interactions"
date: 2023-05-22
location: "Savannah, Georgia, United States"
--- 

Giuliana Berden (1,2,3) and Alberto Piola (1,2,3)

1) Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y
Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
2) Servicio de Hidrografía Naval (SHN), Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
3) Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Dpto de Ciencias de la 
Atmósfera y los Océanos, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The interaction between the Western 
Boundary Currents (WBCs) of the South Atlantic
(e.g. the Brazil and Malvinas currents) and the 
adjacent continental shelf modulates the primary 
productivity over the shelf and may contribute to 
the fertilization of the open ocean. The cross-shelf 
exchange between these two distinct and highly 
interactive environments was studied using a 
high- resolution global reanalysis. The analysis is 
focused on large exchange events at 30-40°S,
where the boundary currents converge to form the 
Brazil-Malvinas Confluence, which is 
characterized by high mesoscale energy. The 
maximum export event, which occurred on 12 July 
2010, was analyzed by implementing a Lagrangian
analysis. This event reached an export of 9.45 Sv 
(more than 4-fold the time- averaged export) and 
lasted 1 day. The magnitude of the cross-shelf exchange is driven by the along-shelf winds over 
the shelf that lead to the convergence of the 
along-shelf flow, which is compensated by 
offshore transport. The preferential export path is 
determined by the mesoscale activity of the WBCs 
and their positions
